The Unferð Intermezzo: Account of Bēowulf's swimming adventure with Breca. Entertainment in the hall.Bēowulf, taunted by Unferð with having been beaten in a swimming match with Breca,On the Breca episode, see especially Bu. 51-55; Cha. Wid. 110 f.; Lawrence L 4.91; Bjorkman, Beibl. xxx 170 ff. sets him right by telling the true story of the incident; whereupon he makes a spirited attack upon his critic's character and record, winding up with a confident prediction of his own success against Grendel.Unferð represents the swimming tour as a contest (506 f., 517). Bēowulf, on the other hand, explains that the adventure was entered upon solely to fulfill a boastful pledge (beot, 536) without any idea of rivalry (543), although he does consider himself superior to any contestant whatever. In fact, he makes much more of his struggles with the sea-monsters.This swimming exploit, which has frequently been assumed to rest on a mythological basis,Thus, to Mullenhoff (1 f.) Breca meant the stormy sea, to Moller (22), the gulf stream, to Laistner (L 4.47.265), the sun; Sarrazin (St. 65 f.) considered the story a specialized form of a Baldr myth; Niedner (L 4 53) recognized in Bēowulf-Breca the Dioscurian twins. looks rather like an exaggerated account of one of those sporting feats common among the sea-loving Northern people (and which naturally often took the form of contests).See Weinhold L 9.32.311 f.; Panzer 270 f.; cf. Mullenhoff L 9.14.1.344 f. -- Bēowulf himself on a later occasion swims from Friesland to his own home in southern Sweden, with thirty armors on his arm (2359 ff.). In particular, a somewhat similar tale of a swimming match in the Egils Saga ok Ásmundar (of the 14th century) has been cited,Bugge, l.c. but the parallelism noted is far from exact. That Breca was known to Ags. heroic legend,Perhaps in connection with the sea; see also Glossary of Proper Names. is proved by the allusion in Wids. 25: Breoca [wëold] Brondingum. But nothing points to an old tradition in which the Breca incident was connected with the person of Bēowulf. It should be added that the story of the swimming could not well have formed the subject of a separate lay.The narrative of this youthful trial of strength, inspiring, as it does, confidence in Bēowulf's ability to cope with the fearful monster, is eminently appropriate at this point. It may also be abundantly illustrated by analogies from folk-tales.See Panzer 272. That the name of Breca, Bēanstān's son, is derived from a *Stānbreca (cf. Steinhauer, etc.) of some such folk-tales, is a rather far-fetched hypothesis of Panzer's.The distance covered by the two endurance swimmers is very considerable. The Finna land 580 (land of the Finns or rather Lapps) where Beowulf comes ashore is usually identified with Finmarken in the north of Norway. By the land of the Heaþo-RǣmasHeaþo- serves as epitheton ornans, cp. Heaðo-Beardan, Heaðo-Scilfing（as). 519 is probably meant the region of the modern Romerike (to the north of Christiania), called in ON.: Raumariki, and cited as a tribal name Raumaricii by Jordanes, c. 3. In prehistoric times it may very well have included a strip of seashore.The enormous distance separating the landing places of Bēowulf and Breca would be lessened if we assume either that the 'land of the Finns' is the district of Finnheden (Finnved) in Småland, Sweden (see Schück L 4.74.1.28), or that the term Heaþo-Rǣmas refers to Romsdalen (ON. Raumsdalr) on the west coast of Norway (Boer L 4.58.46; cf. Ettmüller's ed. of Widsið [1839], p. 22). The mention of the probably fictitious Brondingas 521 does not add to our knowledge. Unfortunately we do not even know from what place the swimmers started. On the Finns, see also R. Much, R.-L. ii 51 ff. However, we are by no means compelled to believe that the poet had very clear notions of the geography of the scene.