It would seem fitting for a Northern folk, deriving the greaterand better part of their speech, laws, and customs from aNorthern root, that the North should be to them, if not a holyland, yet at least a place more to be regarded than any part ofthe world beside; that howsoever their knowledge widened of othermen, the faith and deeds of their forefathers would never lackinterest for them, but would always be kept in remembrance.  Onecause after another has, however, aided in turning attention toclassic men and lands at the cost of our own history.  Amongbattles, "every schoolboy" knows the story of Marathon orSalamis, while it would be hard indeed to find one who did morethan recognise the name, if even that, of the great fights ofHafrsfirth or Sticklestead.  The language and history of Greeceand Rome, their laws and religions, have been always held part ofthe learning needful to an educated man, but no trouble has beentaken to make him familiar with his own people or their tongue.Even that Englishman who knew Alfred, Bede, Caedmon, as well ashe knew Plato, Caesar, Cicero, or Pericles, would be hard besteadwere he asked about the great peoples from whom we sprang; thewarring of Harold Fairhair or Saint Olaf; the Viking Viking (Ice. "Vikingr"; "vik", a bay or creek, "ingr",     beloning to, (or men of) freebooters. kingdomsin these (the British) Western Isles; the settlement of Iceland,or even of Normandy.  The knowledge of all these things would nowbe even smaller than it is among us were it not that there wasone land left where the olden learning found refuge and was keptin being.  In England, Germany, and the rest of Europe, what isleft of the traditions of pagan times has been altered in athousand ways by foreign influence, even as the peoples and theirspeech have been by the influx of foreign blood; but Iceland heldto the old tongue that was once the universal speech of northernfolk, and held also the great stores of tale and poem that areslowly becoming once more the common heritage of theirdescendants.  The truth, care, and literary beauty of itsrecords; the varied and strong life shown alike in tale andhistory; and the preservation of the old speech, character, andtradition -- a people placed apart as the Icelanders have been --combine to make valuable what Iceland holds for us.  Not before1770, when Bishop Percy translated Mallet's "NorthernAntiquities", was anything known here of Icelandic, or itsliterature.  Only within the latter part of this century has itbeen studied, and in the brief book-list at the end of thisvolume may be seen the little that has been done as yet.  It is,however, becoming ever clearer, and to an increasing number, howsupremely important is Icelandic as a word-hoard to the English-speaking peoples, and that in its legend, song, and story thereis a very mine of noble and pleasant beauty and high manhood.That which has been done, one may hope, is but the beginning of agreat new birth, that shall give back to our language andliterature all that heedlessness and ignorance bid fair forawhile to destroy.The Scando-Gothic peoples who poured southward and westward overEurope, to shake empires and found kingdoms, to meet Greek andRoman in conflict, and levy tribute everywhere, had kept up theirconstantly-recruited waves of incursion, until they had raised abarrier of their own blood.  It was their own kin, the sons ofearlier invaders, who stayed the landward march of the Northmenin the time of Charlemagne.  To the Southlands their road by landwas henceforth closed.  Then begins the day of the Vikings, who,for two hundred years and more, "held the world at ransom." Under many and brave leaders they first of all came round the"Western Isles""West over the Sea" is the word for the British Isles. toward the end of the eighth century; soonafter they invaded Normandy, and harried the coasts of France;gradually they lengthened their voyages until there was no shoreof the then known world upon which they were unseen or unfelt.  Aglance at English history will show the large part of it theyfill, and how they took tribute from the Anglo-Saxons, who, bythe way, were far nearer kin to them than is usually thought.  InIreland, where the old civilisation was falling to pieces, theyfounded kingdoms at Limerick and Dublin among other places;See Todd (J. H.). "War of the Gaedhil with the Gaill".the last named, of which the first king, Olaf the White, wastraditionally descended of Sigurd the Volsung,He was son of Ingiald, son of Thora, daughter of Sigurd     Snake-I'-th'-eye, son of Ragnar Lodbrok by Aslaug, daughter     of Sigurd by Brynhild.  The genealogy is, doubtless, quite     mythical. endured evento the English invasion, when it was taken by men of the sameViking blood a little altered.  What effect they produced uponthe natives may be seen from the description given by the unknownhistorian of the "Wars of the Gaedhil with the Gaill":   "In aword, although there were an hundred hard-steeled iron heads onone neck, and an hundred sharp, ready, cool, never-rusting brazentongues in each head, and an hundred garrulous, loud, unceasingvoices from each tongue, they could not recount, or narrate, orenumerate, or tell what all the Gaedhil suffered in common --both men and women, laity and clergy, old and young, noble andignoble -- of hardship, and of injury, and of oppression, inevery house, from these valiant, wrathful, purely pagan people.Even though great were this cruelty, oppression, and tyranny,though numerous were the oft-victorious clans of the many-familied Erinn; though numerous their kings, and their royalchiefs, and their princes; though numerous their heroes andchampions, and their brave soldiers, their chiefs of valour andrenown and deeds of arms; yet not one of them was able to giverelief, alleviation, or deliverance from that oppression andtyranny, from the numbers and multitudes, and the cruelty and thewrath of the brutal, ferocious, furious, untamed, implacablehordes by whom that oppression was inflicted, because of theexcellence of their polished, ample, treble, heavy, trusty,glittering corslets; and their hard, strong, valiant swords; andtheir well-riveted long spears, and their ready, brilliant armsof valour besides; and because of the greatness of theirachievements and of their deeds, their bravery, and their valour,their strength, and their venom, and their ferocity, and becauseof the excess of their thirst and their hunger for the brave,fruitful, nobly-inhabited, full of cataracts, rivers, bays, pure,smooth-plained, sweet grassy land of Erinn" -- (pp. 52-53).  Somepart of this, however, must be abated, because the chronicler isexalting the terror-striking enemy that he may still furtherexalt his own people, the Dal Cais, who did so much under BrianBoroimhe to check the inroads of the Northmen.  When a book doesA Collection of Sagas and other Historical Documents     relating to the Settlements and Descents of the Northmen on     the British Isles. Ed., G. W. Dasent, D.C.L, and Gudbrand     Vigfusson, M.A. "In the Press. Longmans, London. 8vo. appear, which has been announced these ten years past, weshall have more material for the reconstruction of the life ofthose times than is now anywhere accessible.  Viking earldomsalso were the Orkneys, Faroes, and Shetlands.  So late as 1171,in the reign of Henry II., the year after Beckett's murder, EarlSweyn Asleifsson of Orkney, who had long been the terror of thewestern seas, "fared a sea-roving" and scoured the western coastof England, Man, and the east of Ireland, but was killed in anattack on his kinsmen of Dublin.  He had used to go upon aregular plan that may be taken as typical of the homely manner ofmost of his like in their cruising: "Sweyn had in the spring hardwork, and made them lay down very much seed, and looked muchafter it himself.  But when that toil was ended, he fared awayevery spring on a viking-voyage, and harried about among thesouthern isles and Ireland, and came home after midsummer.  Thathe called spring-viking.  Then he was at home until the corn-fields were reaped down, and the grain seen to and stored.  Thenhe fared away on a viking-voyage, and then he did not come hometill the winter was one month off, and that he called his autumn-viking.""Orkneyinga Saga".Toward the end of the ninth century Harold Fairhair, eitherspurred by the example of Charlemagne, or really prompted, asSnorri Sturluson tells us, resolved to bring all Norway underhim.  As Snorri has it in "Heimskringla": "King Harold sent hismen to a girl hight Gyda.... The king wanted her for his leman;for she was wondrous beautiful but of high mood withal.  Now whenthe messengers came there and gave their message to her, she madeanswer that she would not throw herself away even to take a kingfor her husband, who swayed no greater kingdom than a fewdistricts; `And methinks,' said she, `it is a marvel that no kinghere in Norway will put all the land under him, after the fashionthat Gorm the Old did in Denmark, or Eric at Upsala.'  Themessengers deemed this a dreadfully proud-spoken answer, andasked her what she thought would come of such an one, for Haroldwas so mighty a man that his asking was good enough for her.  Butalthough she had replied to their saying otherwise than theywould, they saw no likelihood, for this while, of bearing heralong with them against her will, so they made ready to fare backagain.  When they were ready and the folk followed them out, Gydasaid to the messengers -- `Now tell to King Harold these mywords: -- I will only agree to be his lawful wife upon thecondition that he shall first, for sake of me, put under him thewhole of Norway, so that he may bear sway over that kingdom asfreely and fully as King Eric over the realm of Sweden, or KingGorm over Denmark; for only then, methinks, can he be called kingof a people.'  Now his men came back to King Harold, bringing himthe words of the girl, and saying she was so bold and heedlessthat she well deserved the king should send a greater troop ofpeople for her, and put her to some disgrace.  Then answered theking. `This maid has not spoken or done so much amiss that sheshould be punished, but the rather should she be thanked for herwords.  She has reminded me,' said he, `of somewhat that it seemswonderful I did not think of before.  And now,' added he, `I makethe solemn vow, and take who made me and rules over all things,to witness that never shall I clip or comb my hair until I havesubdued all Norway with scatt, and duties, and lordships; or, ifnot, have died in the seeking.'  Guttorm gave great thanks to theking for his oath, saying it was "royal work fulfilling royalrede."  The new and strange government that Harold tried toenforce -- nothing less than the feudal system in a rough guise --- which made those who had hitherto been their own men save atspecial times, the king's men at all times, and laid freemenunder tax, was withstood as long as might be by the sturdyNorsemen.  It was only by dint of hard fighting that he slowlywon his way, until at Hafrsfirth he finally crushed all effectiveopposition.  But the discontented, "and they were a greatmultitude," fled oversea to the outlands, Iceland, the Faroes,the Orkneys, and Ireland.  The whole coast of Europe, even toGreece and the shores of the Black Sea, the northern shores ofAfrica, and the western part of Asia, felt the effects also. Rolf Pad-th'-hoof, son of Harold's dear friend Rognvald, made anoutlaw for a cattle-raid within the bounds of the kingdom, betookhimself to France, and, with his men, founded a new people and adynasty.Iceland had been known for a good many years, but its onlydwellers had been Irish Culdees, who sought that lonely land topray in peace.  Now, however, both from Norway and the WesternIsles settlers began to come in.  Aud, widow of Olaf the White,King of Dublin, came, bringing with her many of mixed blood, forthe Gaedhil (pronounced "Gael", Irish) and the Gaill (pronounced"Gaul", strangers) not only fought furiously, but made friendsfirmly, and often intermarried.  Indeed, the Westmen were amongthe first arrivals, and took the best parts of the island -- onits western shore, appropriately enough.  After a time theVikings who had settled in the Isles so worried Harold and hiskingdom, upon which they swooped every other while, that he drewtogether a mighty force, and fell upon them wheresoever he couldfind them, and followed them up with fire and sword; and this hedid twice, so that in those lands none could abide but folk whowere content to be his men, however lightly they might hold theirallegiance.  Hence it was to Iceland that all turned who held tothe old ways, and for over sixty years from the first comer therewas a stream of hardy men pouring in, with their families andtheir belongings, simple yeomen, great and warwise chieftains,rich landowners, who had left their land "for the overbearing ofKing Harold," as the "Landnamabok" Landtaking-book -- "landnam", landtaking, from "at nema     land", hence also the early settlers were called     "landnamsmenn". has it.  "There also weshall escape the troubling of kings and scoundrels", says the"Vatsdaelasaga".  So much of the best blood left Norway that theking tried to stay the leak by fines and punishments, but invain.As his ship neared the shore, the new-coming chief would leave itto the gods as to where he settled.  The hallowed pillars of thehigh seat, which were carried away from his old abode, werethrown overboard, with certain rites, and were let drive withwind and wave until they came ashore.  The piece of land whichlay next the beach they were flung upon was then viewed from thenearest hill-summit, and place of the homestead picked out.  Thenthe land was hallowed by being encircled with fire, parcelledamong the band, and marked out with boundary-signs; the houseswere built, the "town" or home-field walled in, a temple put up,and the settlement soon assumed shape.  In 1100 there were 4500franklins, making a population of about 50,000, fully three-fourths of whom had a strong infusion of Celtic blood in them.The mode of life was, and is, rather pastoral than aught else. In the 39,200 square miles of the island's area there are nowabout 250 acres of cultivated land, and although there has beenmuch more in times past, the Icelanders have always been forcedto reckon upon flocks and herds as their chief resources, grainof all kinds, even rye, only growing in a few favoured places,and very rarely there; the hay, self-sown, being the only certainharvest.  On the coast fishing and fowling were of help, butnine-tenths of the folk lived by their sheep and cattle.Potatoes, carrots, turnips, and several kinds of cabbage have,however, been lately grown with success.  They produced their ownfood and clothing, and could export enough wool, cloth, horn,dried fish, etc., as enabled them to obtain wood for building,iron for tools, honey, wine, grain, etc, to the extent of theirsimple needs.  Life and work was lotted by the seasons and theirchanges; outdoor work -- fishing, herding, hay-making, and fuel-getting -- filling the long days of summer, while the long, darkwinter was used in weaving and a hundred indoor crafts.  Theclimate is not so bad as might be expected, seeing that theisland touches the polar circle, the mean temperature atReykjavik being 39 degrees.The religion which the settlers took with them into Iceland --the ethnic religion of the Norsefolk, which fought its last greatfight at Sticklestead, where Olaf Haraldsson lost his life andwon the name of Saint -- was, like all religions, a compound ofmyths, those which had survived from savage days, and those whichexpressed the various degrees of a growing knowledge of life andbetter understanding of nature.  Some historians and commentatorsare still fond of the unscientific method of taking a laterreligion, in this case christianity, and writing down allapparently coincident parts of belief, as having been borrowedfrom the christian teachings by the Norsefolk, while all thatremain they lump under some slighting head.  Every folk has fromthe beginning of time sought to explain the wonders of nature,and has, after its own fashion, set forth the mysteries of life.The lowest savage, no less than his more advanced brother, has aphilosophy of the universe by which he solves the world-problemto his own satisfaction, and seeks to reconcile his conduct withhis conception of the nature of things.  Now, it is not to bethought, save by "a priori" reasoners, that such a folk as theNorthmen -- a mighty folk, far advanced in the arts of life,imaginative, literary -- should have had no further creed thanthe totemistic myths of their primitive state; a state they havewholly left ere they enter history.  Judging from universalanalogy, the religion of which record remains to us was just whatmight be looked for at the particular stage of advancement theNorthmen had reached.  Of course something may have been gainedfrom contact with other peoples -- from the Greeks during thelong years in which the northern races pressed upon theirfrontier; from the Irish during the existence of the westernviking-kingdoms; but what I particularly warn young studentsagainst is the constant effort of a certain order of minds towrest facts into agreement with their pet theories of religion orwhat not.  The whole tendency of the more modern investigationshows that the period of myth-transmission is long over erehistory begins.  The same confusion of different stages of myth-making is to be found in the Greek religion, and indeed in thoseof all peoples; similar conditions of mind produce similarpractices, apart from all borrowing of ideas and manners; inGreece we find snake-dances, bear-dances, swimming with sacredpigs, leaping about in imitation of wolves, dog-feasts, andoffering of dogs' flesh to the gods -- all of them practicesdating from crude savagery, mingled with ideas of exalted andnoble beauty, but none now, save a bigot, would think of accusingthe Greeks of having stolen all their higher beliefs.  Even weresome part of the matter of their myths taken from others, yet theNorsemen have given their gods a noble, upright, great spirit,and placed them upon a high level that is all their own.To all interested in the subject of comparative mythology,     Andrew Lang's two admirable books, "Custom and Myth" (1884,     8vo) and "Myth, Ritual, and Religion" (2 vols., crown 8vo,     1887), both published by Longmans, London, may be warmly     recommended.  From the prose Edda the following all too brief statement of thesalient points of Norse belief is made up: -- "The first andeldest of gods is hight Allfather; he lives from all ages, andrules over all his realm, and sways all things great and small;he smithied heaven and earth, and the lift, and all that belongsto them; what is most, he made man, and gave him a soul thatshall live and never perish; and all men that are right-mindedshall live and be with himself in Vingolf; but wicked men fare toHell, and thence into Niithell, that is beneath in the ninthworld.  Before the earth `'twas the morning of time, when yetnaught was, nor sand nor sea was there, nor cooling streams.Earth was not found, nor Heaven above; a Yawning-gap there was,but grass nowhere.'  Many ages ere the earth was shapen wasNiflheim made, but first was that land in the southern spherehight Muspell, that burns and blazes, and may not be trodden bythose who are outlandish and have no heritage there.  Surtr sitson the border to guard the land; at the end of the world he willfare forth, and harry and overcome all the gods and burn theworld with fire.  Ere the races were yet mingled, or the folk ofmen grew, Yawning-gap, which looked towards the north parts, wasfilled with thick and heavy ice and rime, and everywhere withinwere fog and gusts; but the south side of Yawning-gap lightenedby the sparks and gledes that flew out of Muspell-heim; as coldarose out of Niflheim and all things grim, so was that part thatlooked towards Muspell hot and bright; but Yawning-gap was aslight as windless air, and when the blast of heat met the rime,so that it melted and dropped and quickened; from those life-drops there was shaped the likeness of a man, and he was namedYmir; he was bad, and all his kind; and so it is said, when heslept he fell into a sweat; then waxed under his left hand a manand a woman, and one of his feet got a son with the other, andthence cometh the Hrimthursar.  The next thing when the rimedropped was that the cow hight Audhumla was made of it; but fourmilk-rivers ran out of her teats, and she fed Ymir; she lickedrime-stones that were salt, and the first day there came at even,out of the stones, a man's hair, the second day a man's head, thethird day all the man was there.  He is named Turi; he was fairof face, great and mighty; he gat a son named Bor, who took tohim Besla, daughter of Bolthorn, the giant, and they had threesons, Odin, Vili, and Ve.  Bor's sons slew Ymir the giant, butwhen he fell there ran so much blood out of his wounds that allthe kin of the Hrimthursar were drowned, save Hvergelmir and hishousehold, who got away in a boat.  Then Bor's sons took Ymir andbore him into the midst of Yawning-gap, and made of him theearth; of his blood seas and waters, of his flesh earth was made;they set the earth fast, and laid the sea round about it in aring without; of his bones were made rocks; stones and pebbles ofhis teeth and jaws and the bones that were broken; they took hisskull and made the lift thereof, and set it up over the earthwith four sides, and under each corner they set dwarfs, and theytook his brain and cast it aloft, and made clouds.  They took thesparks and gledes that went loose, and had been cast out ofMuspellheim, and set them in the lift to give light; they gaveresting-places to all fires, and set some in the lift; some faredfree under it, and they gave them a place and shaped theirgoings.  A wondrous great smithying, and deftly done.  The earthis fashioned round without, and there beyond, round about it liesthe deep sea; and on that sea-strand the gods gave land for anabode to the giant kind, but within on the earth made they a burground the world against restless giants, and for this burg rearedthey the brows of Ymir, and called the burg Midgard.  The godswent along the sea-strand and found two stocks, and shaped out ofthem men; the first gave soul and life, the second wit and willto move, the third face, hearing, speech, and eyesight.  Theygave them clothing and names; the man Ask and the woman Embla;thence was mankind begotten, to whom an abode was given underMidgard.  Then next Bor's sons made them a burg in the midst ofthe world, that is called Asgard; there abode the gods and theirkind, and wrought thence many tidings and feats, both on earthand in the Sky.  Odin, who is hight Allfather, for that he is thefather of all men and sat there in his high seat, seeing over thewhole world and each man's doings, and knew all things that hesaw.  His wife was called Frigg, and their offspring is the Asa-stock, who dwell in Asgard and the realms about it, and all thatstock are known to be gods.  The daughter and wife of Odin wasEarth, and of her he got Thor, him followed strength andsturdiness, thereby quells he all things quick; the strongest ofall gods and men, he has also three things of great price, thehammer Miolnir, the best of strength belts, and when he girdsthat about him waxes his god strength one-half, and his irongloves that he may not miss for holding his hammer's haft. Balidr is Odin's second son, and of him it is good to say, he isfair and: bright in face, and hair, and body, and him all praise;he is wise and fair-spoken and mild, and that nature is in himnone may withstand his doom.  Tyr is daring and best of mood;there is a saw that he is tyrstrong who is before other men andnever yields; he is also so wise that it is said he is tyrlearnedwho is wise.  Bragi is famous for wisdom, and best in tongue-wit,and cunning speech, and song-craft.  `And many other are there,good and great; and one, Loki, fair of face, ill in temper andfickle of mood, is called the backbiter of the Asa, and speakerof evil redes and shame of all gods and men; he has above allthat craft called sleight, and cheats all in all things.  Amongthe children of Loki are Fenris-wolf and Midgards-worm; thesecond lies about all the world in the deep sea, holding his tail in his teeth, though some say Thor has slain him; but Fenris-wolfis bound until the doom of the gods, when gods and men shall cometo an end, and earth and heaven be burnt, when he shall slayOdin.  After this the earth shoots up from the sea, and it isgreen and fair, and the fields bear unsown, and gods and menshall be alive again, and sit in fair halls, and talk of oldtales and the tidings that happened aforetime.  The head-seat, orholiest-stead, of the gods is at Yggdrasil's ash, which is of alltrees best and biggest; its boughs are spread over the wholeworld and stand above heaven; one root of the ash is in heaven,and under the root is the right holy spring; there hold the godsdoom every day; the second root is with the Hrimthursar, wherebefore was Yawning-gap; under that root is Mimir's spring, whereknowledge and wit lie hidden; thither came Allfather and begged adrink, but got it not before he left his eye in pledge; the thirdroot is over Niflheim, and the worm Nidhogg gnaws the rootbeneath.  A fair hall stands under the ash by the spring, and outof it come three maidens, Norns, named Has-been, Being, Will-be,who shape the lives of men; there are beside other Norns, whocome to every man that is born to shape his life, and some ofthese are good and some evil.  In the boughs of the ash sits aneagle, wise in much, and between his eyes sits the hawkVedrfalnir; the squirrel Ratatoskr runs up and down along theash, bearing words of hate betwixt the eagle and the worm.  ThoseNorns who abide by the holy spring draw from it every day water,and take the clay that lies around the well, and sprinkle them upover the ash for that its boughs should not wither or rot.  Allthose men that have fallen in the fight, and borne wounds andtoil unto death, from the beginning of the world, are come toOdin in Valhall; a very great throng is there, and many moreshall yet come; the flesh of the boar Soerfmnir is sodden forthem every day, and he is whole again at even; and the mead theydrink that flows from the teats of the she-goat Heidhrun.  Themeat Odin has on his board he gives to his two wolves, Geri andFreki, and he needs no meat, wine is to him both meat and drink;ravens twain sit on his shoulders, and say into his ear alltidings that they see and hear; they are called Huginn and Muninn(mind and memory); them sends he at dawn to fly over the wholeworld, and they come back at breakfast-tide, thereby becomes hewise in many tidings, and for this men call him Raven's-god.Every day, when they have clothed them, the heroes put on theirarms and go out into the yard and fight and fell each other; thatis their play, and when it looks toward mealtime, then ride theyhome to Valhall and sit down to drink.  For murderers and menforsworn is a great hall, and a bad, and the doors looknorthward; it is altogether wrought of adder-backs like a wattledhouse, but the worms' heads turn into the house, and blow venom,so that rivers of venom run along the hall, and in those riversmust such men wade forever."  There was no priest-class; everychief was priest for his own folk, offered sacrifice, performedceremonies, and so on.In politics the homestead, with its franklin-owner, was the unit;the "thing", or hundred-moot, the primal organisation, and the"godord", or chieftainship, its tie.  The chief who had led aband of kinsmen and followers to the new country, takenpossession of land, and shared it among them, became their head-ruler and priest at home, speaker and president of their Thing,and their representative in any dealings with neighbouring chiefsand their clients.  He was not a feudal lord, for any franklincould change his "godord" as he liked, and the right of "judgmentby peers" was in full use.  At first there was no higherorganisation than the local thing.  A central thing, and aspeaker to speak a single "law" for the whole island, wasinstituted in 929, and afterwards the island was divided in fourquarters, each with a court, under the Al-thing.  Society wasdivided only into two classes of men, the free and unfree, thoughpolitical power was in the hands of the franklins alone; "godi"and thrall ate the same food, spoke the same tongue, wore muchthe same clothes, and were nearly alike in life and habits. Among the free men there was equality in all but wealth and thesocial standing that cannot be separated therefrom.  The thrallwas a serf rather than a slave, and could own a house, etc., ofhis own.  In a generation or so the freeman or landless retainer,if he got a homestead of his own, was the peer of the highest inthe land.  During the tenth century Greenland was colonised fromIceland, and by end of the same century christianity wasintroduced into Iceland, but made at first little difference inarrangements of society.  In the thirteenth century disputes overthe power and jurisdiction of the clergy led, with other matters,to civil war, ending in submission to Norway, and the breakingdown of all native great houses.  Although life under thecommonwealth had been rough and irregular, it had been free andvaried, breeding heroes and men of mark; but the "law and order"now brought in left all on a dead level of peasantproprietorship, without room for hope or opening for ambition. An alien governor ruled the island, which was divided under himinto local counties, administered by sheriffs appointed by theking of Norway.  The Al-thing was replaced by a royal court, thelocal work of the local things was taken by a subordinate of thesheriff, and things, quarter-courts, trial by jury, and all therest, were swept away to make room for these "improvements",which have lasted with few changes into this century.  In 1380the island passed under the rule of Denmark, and so continues.Iceland was granted full independence from Denmark in 1944.     -- DBK.  During the fifteenth century the English trade was the onlylink between Iceland and the outer world; the Danish governmentweakened that link as much as it could, and sought to shut in andmonopolise everything Icelandic; under the deadening effect ofsuch rule it is no marvel that everything found a lower level,and many things went out of existence for lack of use.  In thesixteenth century there is little to record but the Reformation,which did little good, if any, and the ravages of English,Gascon, and Algerine pirates who made havoc on the coast; These pirates are always appearing about the same time in     English State papers as plundering along the coasts of the     British Isles, especially Ireland.they appear toward the close of the century and disappear earlyin the seventeenth.  In the eighteenth century small-pox, sheepdisease, famine, and the terrible eruptions of 1765 and 1783,follow one another swiftly and with terrible effect.  At thebeginning of the present century Iceland, however, began to shakeoff the stupor her ill-hap had brought upon her, and as Europeanattention had been drawn to her, she was listened to. Newspapers, periodicals, and a Useful Knowledge Society werestarted; then came free trade, and the "home-rule" struggle,which met with partial success in 1874, and is still beingcarried on.  A colony, Gimli, in far-off Canada, has been formedof Icelandic emigrants, and large numbers have left their mother-land; but there are many co-operative societies organised now,which it is hoped will be able to so revive the old resources ofthe island as to make provision for the old population and waysof life.  There is now again a representative central council,but very many of the old rights and powers have not been yetrestored.  The condition of society is peculiar   absence oftowns, social equality, no abject poverty or great wealth, rarityof crime, making it easy for the whole country to be administeredas a co-operative commonwealth without the great and strikingchanges rendered necessary by more complicated systems.Iceland. has always borne a high name for learning andliterature; on both sides of their descent people inheritedspecial poetic power.  Some of older Eddaic fragments attest thegreat reach and deep overpowering strength of imaginationpossessed by their Norse ancestors; and they themselves had beenquickened by a new leaven.  During the first generations of the"land-taking" a great school of poetry which had arisen among theNorsemen of the Western Isles was brought by them to Iceland.For all the old Scandinavian poetry extant in Icelandic, see     "Corpus Poeticum Borealis" of Vigfusson and Powell.  The poems then produced are quite beyond parallel withthose of any Teutonic language for centuries after their date,which lay between the beginning of the ninth and the end of thetenth centuries.  Through the Greenland colony also came two, orperhaps more, great poems of this western school.  This schoolgrew out of the stress and storm of the viking life, with itswild adventure and varied commerce, and the close contact with anartistic and inventive folk, possessed of high culture and greatlearning.  The infusion of Celtic blood, however slight it mayhave been, had also something to do with the swift intensefeeling and rapidity of passion of the earlier Icelandic poets.They are hot-headed and hot-hearted, warm, impulsive, quick toquarrel or to love, faithful, brave; ready with sword or song tobattle with all comers, or to seek adventure wheresoever it mightbe found.  They leave Iceland young, and wander at their will todifferent courts of northern Europe, where they are always heldin high honour.  Gunnlaug Worm-tongue Snake-tongue -- so called from his biting satire. in 1004 carne toEngland, after being in Norway, as the saga says: -- "Now sailGunnlaug and his fellows into the English main, and come atautumntide south to London Bridge, where they hauled ashore theirship.  Now, at that time King Ethelred, the son of Edgar, ruledover England, and was a good lord; the winter he sat in London.But in those days there was the same tongue in England as inNorway and Denmark; but the tongues changed when William theBastard won England, for thenceforward French went current there,for he was of French kin.  Gunnlaug went presently to the king,and greeted him well and worthily.  The king asked him from whatland he came, and Gunnlaug told him all as it was.  `But,' saidhe, `I have come to meet thee, lord, for that I have made a songon thee, and I would that it might please thee to hearken to thatsong.'  The king said it should be so, and Gunnlaug gave forththe song well and proudly, and this is the burden thereof --"'As God are all folk fearingThe fire lord King of England,Kin of all kings and all folk,To Ethelred the head bow.'The king thanked him for the song, and gave him as song-reward ascarlet cloak lined with the costliest of furs, and golden-broidered down to the hem; and made him his man; and Gunnlaug waswith him all the winter, and was well accounted of."The poems in this volume are part of the wonderful fragmentswhich are all that remain of ancient Scandinavian poetry.  Everypiece which survives has been garnered by Vigfusson and Powell inthe volumes of their "Corpus", where those who seek may find.  Along and illustrious line of poets kept the old traditions, downeven to within a couple centuries, but the earlier great harvestof song was never again equalled.  After christianity had enteredIceland, and that, with other causes, had quieted men's lives,although the poetry which stood to the folk in lieu of music didnot die away, it lost the exclusive hold it had upon men's minds.In a time not so stirring, when emotion was not so fervent or soswift, when there was less to quicken the blood, the story thathad before found no fit expression but in verse, could stretchits limbs, as it were, and be told in prose.  Something of Irishinfluence is again felt in this new departure and that marvellousnew growth, the saga, that came from it, but is little more thanan influence.  Every people find some one means of expressionwhich more than all else suits their mood or their powers, andthis the Icelanders found in the saga.  This was the life of ahero told in prose, but in set form, after a regular fashion thatunconsciously complied with all epical requirements but that ofverse -- simple plot, events in order of time, set phrases foreven the shifting emotion or changeful fortune of a fight orstorm, and careful avoidance of digression, comment, or puttingforward by the narrator of ought but the theme he has in hand; hehimself is never seen.  Something in the perfection of the sagais to be traced to the long winter's evenings, when the wholehousehold, gathered together at their spinning, weaving, and soon, would listen to one of their number who told anew some oldstory of adventure or achievement.  In very truth the saga is aprose epic, and marked by every quality an epic should possess.Growing up while the deeds of dead heroes were fresh in memory,most often recited before the sharers in such deeds, the saga, inits pure form, never goes from what is truth to its teller. Where the saga, as this one of the Volsungs is founded upon thedebris of songs and poems, even then very old, tales ofmythological heroes, of men quite removed from the personalknowledge of the narrator, yet the story is so inwound with thetradition of his race, is so much a part of his thought-life,that every actor in it has for him a real existence.  At thefeast or gathering, or by the fireside, as men made nets andwomen spun, these tales were told over; in their frequentrepetition by men who believed them, though incident or sequenceunderwent no change, they would become closer knit, morecoherent, and each an organic whole.  Gradually they would take aregular and accepted form, which would ease the strain upon thereciter's memory and leave his mind free to adorn the story withfair devices, that again gave help in the making it easier toremember, and thus aided in its preservation.  After a couple ofgenerations had rounded and polished the sagas by their tellingand retelling, they were written down for the most part between 1141 and 1220, and so much was their form impressed upon the mindof the folk, that when learned and literary works appeared, theywere written in the same style; hence we have histories alike ofkingdoms, or families, or miracles, lives of saints, kings, orbishops in saga-form, as well as subjects that seem at firstsight even less hopeful.  All sagas that have yet appeared inEnglish may be found in the book-list at end of this volume, butthey are not a tithe of those that remain.Of all the stories kept in being by the saga-tellers and left forour delight, there is none that so epitomises human experience;has within the same space so much of nature and of life; so fullythe temper and genius of the Northern folk, as that of theVolsungs and Niblungs, which has in varied shapes entered intothe literature of many lands.  In the beginning there is no doubtthat the story belonged to the common ancestral folk of all theTeutonic of Scando-Gothic peoples in the earliest days of theirwanderings.  Whether they came from the Hindu Kush, or originatedin Northern Europe, brought it with them from Asia, or evolved itamong the mountains and rivers it has taken for scenery, noneknow nor can; but each branch of their descendants has it in oneform or another, and as the Icelanders were the very crown andflower of the northern folk, so also the story which is thepeculiar heritage of that folk received in their hands itshighest expression and most noble form.  The oldest shape inwhich we have it is in the Eddaic poems, some of which date fromunnumbered generations before the time to which most of them areusually ascribed, the time of the viking-kingdoms in the WesternIsles.  In these poems the only historical name is that ofAttila, the great Hun leader, who filled so large a part of theimagination of the people whose power he had broken.  There is nodoubt that, in the days when the kingdoms of the Scando-Gothsreached from the North Cape to the Caspian, that some earliergreat king performed his part; but, after the striking career ofAttila, he became the recognised type of a powerful foreignpotentate.  All the other actors are mythic-heroic.  Of theEddaic songs only fragments now remain, but ere they perishedthere arose from them a saga, that now given to the readers ofthis.  The so-called Anglo-Saxons brought part of the story toEngland in "Beowulf"; in which also appear some incidents thatare again given in the Icelandic saga of "Grettir the Strong".Most widely known is the form taken by the story in the hands ofan unknown medieval German poet, who, from the broken balladsthen surviving wrote the "Nibelungenlied" or more properly"Nibelungen Not" ("The Need of the Niblungs").  In this thecharacters are all renamed, some being more or less historicalactors in mid-European history, as Theodoric of the East-Goths,for instance.  The whole of the earlier part of the story hasdisappeared, and though Siegfried (Sigurd) has slain a dragon,there is nothing to connect it with the fate that follows thetreasure; Andvari, the Volsungs, Fafnir, and Regin are allforgotten; the mythological features have become faint, and thegeneral air of the whole is that of medieval romance.  The swoardGram is replaced by Balmung, and the Helm of Awing by theTarn-cap -- the former with no gain, the latter with great loss.The curse of Andvari, which in the saga is grimly real, workingitself out with slow, sure steps that no power of god or man canturn aside, in the medieval poem is but a mere scenic effect, astrain of mystery and magic, that runs through the changes of thestory with much added picturesqueness, but that has no obviousrelation to the working-out of the plot, or fulfilment of theirdestiny by the different characters.  Brynhild loses a greatdeal, and is a poor creature when compared with herself in thesaga; Grimhild and her fateful drink have gone; Gudrun(Chriemhild)is much more complex, but not more tragic; one newcharacter, Rudiger, appears as the type of chivalry; but Sigurd(Siegfred) the central figure, though he has lost by the omissionof so much of his life, is, as before, the embodiment of all thevirtues that were dear to northern hearts.  Brave, strong,generous, dignified, and utterly truthful, he moves amid a tangleof tragic events, overmastered by a mighty fate, and in life ordeath is still a hero without stain or flaw.  It is no wonderthat he survives to this day in the national songs of the FaroeIslands and in the folk-ballads of Denmark; that his legendshould have been mingled with northern history through RagnarLodbrog, or southern through Attila and Theodoric; that it shouldhave inspired William Morris in producing the one great Englishepic of the century; "Sigurd the Volsung", which seems to have become all but     forgotten in this century. -- DBK. and Richard Wagner in the mightiestamong his music-dramas.  Of the story as told in the saga thereis no need here to speak, for to read it, as may be done a fewpages farther on, is that not better than to read about it?  Butit may be urged upon those that are pleased and moved by thepassion and power, the strength and deep truth of it, to find outmore than they now know of the folk among whom it grew, and theland in which they dwelt.  In so doing they will come to see howneedful are a few lessons from the healthy life and speech ofthose days, to be applied in the bettering of our own.H. HALLIDAY SPARLING.